Kevin Purbhoo's mosaics put diamonds around the sides of 
Knutson-Tao puzzles, resulting in a hexagonal figure.

I believe a hexagonal figure tiled entirely with diamonds
corresponds to a `lattice surface', a 3 dimensional generalization
of the lattice paths that are counted by binomials.

What 3-d sort of thing would have, not just diamonds,
but also triangles and maybe hexagons in it?

One of the important qualities (probably not the most important,
because the most important is something about the applicability
to spectra of zero-sum triples of Hermitian matrices, or Schubert calculus) about a triangle is that the counts of zeroes and ones
along each of the three edges are equal.

What is a lower-dimensional analog of the mosaic?
Maybe something like a lattice path with additional kinds of steps?
Maybe diagonals are allowed?
What do I know about paths through rectangular lattices where diagonals are sometimes allowed?
The obvious one is dynamic programming for computing string edit distance.

A pullback is a variation of a product.
Suppose that you replaced the product with pullback,
in my little "binomials are maps from delta i times delta j to delta 2" theorem.
Would you get something like the dynamic programming edit distance algorithm?


Imagine that you want to write one string of [01]^* left to right along the top of a rectangle,
and you want to write one string of [01]^* top to bottom along the left side of a rectangle,
and you want edge-colored tiles that will fit in the rectangle and guarantee that the number of zeroes and ones are equal.

Base case, 0 along the top, 0 along side.
1. There is at least one tile with 0 along the top,
and 0 along the left side.
2. There is no tile with 0 along the top and
and 1 along the left side.

Base case, 1 along the top, 1 along the side.
1. There is at least one tile with 1 along the top,
and 1 along the left side.
2. There is no tile with 1 along the top and 0 along the left side.

Recursive case, suppose we have a triangular tiling
which is already completed. We extend a 1 further...


